Adding thread hierarchy article to gpu glossary (#34)
modal-labs/gpu-glossary: gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-hierarchy.md

---

![The thread hierarchy of the [CUDA programming model](/gpu-glossary/device-software/cuda-programming-model) spans from individual [threads](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread) to [thread blocks](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) to [thread block grids](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block-grid) (left), mapping onto the hardware from [CUDA Cores](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/cuda-core) to [Streaming Multiprocessors](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/streaming-multiprocessor) to the entire GPU (right). Modified from diagrams in NVIDIA's [CUDA Refresher: The CUDA Programming Model](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/cuda-refresher-cuda-programming-model/) and the NVIDIA [CUDA C++ Programming Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#programming-model).](themed-image://cuda-programming-model.svg)

The thread hierarchy is a key abstraction of the [CUDA programming model](/gpu-glossary/device-software/cuda-programming-model), alongside the [memory hierarchy](/gpu-glossary/device-software/memory-hierarchy). It organizes the execution of parallel programs across multiple levels, from individual threads up to entire GPU devices.

> At the lowest level are individual [threads](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread), each executing on a single [Core](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/cuda-core). Groups of 32 threads are organized into [warps](/gpu-glossary/device-software/warp) and execute instructions in lockstep under the control of the [Warp Scheduler](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/warp-scheduler).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the lowest level are individual [threads](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread), each executing on a single [Core](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/cuda-core). Groups of 32 threads are organized into [warps](/gpu-glossary/device-software/warp) and execute instructions in lockstep under the control of the [Warp Scheduler](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/warp-scheduler).
```
```suggestion
At the lowest level are individual [threads](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread), each executing on a single [Core](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/cuda-core). Groups of 32 threads are organized into [warps](/gpu-glossary/device-software/warp) and execute instructions in lockstep under the control of the [Warp Scheduler](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/warp-scheduler).
```
```suggestion
At the lowest level are individual [threads](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread), each executing on a single [Core](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/cuda-core). Groups of 32 threads are organized into [warps](/gpu-glossary/device-software/warp) and execute instructions together under the control of the [Warp Scheduler](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/warp-scheduler).
```

Threads can diverge -- and since Volta (iirc) the scheduling can be independent, with each thread in the warp having its own instruction pointer. This is still a bad idea for perf reasons! But we should be slightly less strong in the language here.

Reviewer: Actually, on reflection, we shouldn't talk about warps here.

Warps are not part of the CUDA programming model -- you'll notice that they are not in the diagram. They are maybe part of the PTX machine model?

The intermediate level consists of [thread blocks](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block), which are also known as [cooperative thread arrays](/device-software/cooperative-thread-array) in [PTX](/gpu-glossary/device-software/parallel-thread-execution) and [SASS](/gpu-glossary/device-software/streaming-assembler). Each [thread](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread) has a unique identifier within its [thread block](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) via the built-in `threadIdx` variable, a 3-component vector that enables one-, two-, or three-dimensional indexing patterns. All threads within a block execute on the same [Streaming Multiprocessor (SM)](/gpu-glossary/device-hardware/streaming-multiprocessor) and can coordinate through [shared memory](/gpu-glossary/device-software/shared-memory) and the `__syncthreads()` barrier function.  

> At the highest level, multiple [thread blocks](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) are organized into a [thread block grid](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block-grid) that spans the entire GPU. Each [thread block](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) has its own unique identifier within the grid via the built-in `blockIdx` variable and the `blockDim` variable provides the dimensions of the [thread block](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block). [Thread blocks](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) within a grid execute concurrently with no guaranteed execution order. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the highest level, multiple [thread blocks](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) are organized into a [thread block grid](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block-grid) that spans the entire GPU. [Thread blocks](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) are strictly limited in their coordiation and communication. Blocks within a grid execute concurrently with respect to each other, with no guaranteed execution order. CUDA programs must be written so that any interleaving of blocks is valid, from fully serial to fully parallel. That means thread blocks](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) cannot, for instance, synchronize with barriers. Like [threads](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread), each [thread block](/gpu-glossary/device-software/thread-block) has a unique, index-based identifier to support assignment of work based on array index.
```
